[THEME MUSIC]
>>GEORGE NOORY: Well,
welcome to "Beyond Belief."
I'm George Noory,
and in this program,
we're going to talk about
wealth inequality-- what
does that mean?
How does that affect all of
us-- with our special guest,
Dr. Peter Phillips.
He is a professor of sociology
at Sonoma State University
and the past director
of the Censored Project.
Here we go.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>A major reason behind the
immense power of the global 1%
is the lack of
transparency surrounding
their role in the world's
financial systems.
By keeping the other
99% of us in the dark,
they are able to maintain
their grip on those systems.
Dr. Peter Phillips,
a sociology professor
at Sonoma State University
and a prolific author,
wants to change that.
He is perhaps best known for
highlighting media failures
and oversights for the
award-winning organization
Project Censored.
In recent years,
Dr. Phillips has
turned his tenacious
research skills
to uncovering the composition
of the elites, how they maintain
and channel power.
He shares the secrets they
hope you'll never learn today,
on "Beyond Belief."
>>NOORY: So welcome
back to "Beyond Belief"
with our guest, Peter Phillips.
Peter, wealth inequality--
what the heck is that?
And how did you personally
get involved in that?
>>DR. PETER PHILLIPS:
Wealth inequality
reflects the concentration
of capital in the world.
And though since
the Occupy movement,
we've had the 99% versus the 1%,
the 1% being the richest people
in the world,
multi-millionaires and that--
>>NOORY: Controlling everything.
>>PHILLIPS: Well yeah,
but actually the 1%--
the bottom tier of the 1%,
it's really only half a million
dollars.
It's the upper tiers of the
1%, the one thousandth of 1%,
or the one hundredth
of 1%, these
are the multi-millionaires,
the multi-billionaires.
And most of that's in
money management firms.
It's in central banks, very
centralized corporations,
or a place like
BlackRock, which is
one of the largest
money management
corporations in the world.
They manage-- just a few
thousand people manage--
$100 trillion worth of wealth.
That's close to half
the wealth of the world.
>>NOORY: What's their
game plan, Peter?
What do they want to do?
>>PHILLIPS: Well, they're
caught in this trap
of acquiring capital
and then needing
to see it grow and expand.
So I mean, capital, they want
to get a 7% to 10% return.
So they're always looking for
ways of investing anywhere
in the world.
And sometimes they
conspire together
to do that, in various ways,
to maximize their return.
And then it ends up
concentrating even more.
We did a study on
the financial core
of the transnational
capitalist class.
So these people
are transnational.
They're not just
one nation state--
>>NOORY: Right.
>>PHILLIPS:
--they're globalized.
>>NOORY: They're everywhere.
>>PHILLIPS: They operate
all over the world.
>>NOORY: They're everywhere.
>>PHILLIPS: And so we took the
10 largest money management
firms and the 10 largest,
most concentrated corporations
in the world, and we put
that two lists together.
There's only 13 firms.
>>NOORY: That's it?
>>PHILLIPS: They're the biggest.
They're the core.
>>NOORY: Right, planet-wide.
>>PHILLIPS: Just those 13
firms alone manage $25 trillion
worth of wealth.
That was four years ago.
It's probably $30 trillion
to $40 trillion now.
And they have 161
people that are
on their boards of directors.
So they could fit
in our studio here.
It's a small enough group.
And they know each other.
They interact in various
transnational groups,
like the Bilderberger Group,
and the Trilateral Commission,
and the Counc--
>>NOORY: Right.
And they go to the Bohemian
Grove and have a good time.
>>PHILLIPS: And they go to the
same kinds of places, exactly.
So they have similar interests.
And their interest is to
protect capital worldwide,
to see it grow and expand,
and to absorb and take
over even more wealth.
>>NOORY: Are these good people?
Nice people?
>>PHILLIPS: Well, they're
often very nice, very friendly,
very nice to talk
to and be around.
But they make decisions
that impact the world.
And looking in the
world today, we
have 3 billion people who
live on less than $3 a day.
>>NOORY: What?
>>PHILLIPS: 3 billion people
live on less than $3 a day
in the world.
>>NOORY: How do they do that?
>>PHILLIPS: Not very well.
And 35,000 of them die, daily,
from malnutrition or very
easily curable diseases.
>>NOORY: Diseases
and things like that.
>>PHILLIPS: So it's 10
World Trade Center collapses
daily, among people in
the world who are dying,
that don't need to die if
wealth was better spread around.
>>NOORY: Men, women,
children-- all of them.
>>PHILLIPS: But
capitalism will even
go to the point of trying to
market stuff to those people.
Those billions of
people, we're trying
to sell them a cigarette
or a Coca-Cola.
>>NOORY: Or a
cellphone, or something.
>>PHILLIPS: Well, they
don't buy cellphones.
They don't have enough
money to do that.
But we'll try to
sell them a Coke.
So it's very concentrated, and
the consequences for people
worldwide are very negative.
And ultimately, as
it concentrates more,
we're seeing a decline in
the middle class worldwide.
There's jobs that just
aren't accessible.
There are surplus people.
They don't have anything
to do, any work to do.
That capital's running
the world and expanding.
>>NOORY: How long
though, Peter, can they
continue to keep the lid
on something like this
before it explodes?
You can only hold
people back so long.
And then they just
say, that's it.
We're fed up.
>>PHILLIPS: They're
very worried about it.
They are very worried about it.
The Occupy Movement-- any
kind of democracy movement
from the grassroots, the
bottom up, they're afraid.
The Occupy Movement was heavily
infiltrated across the United
States by the national
security state-- police
departments, FBI, everybody.
And the Arab Spring,
and anywhere that people
are acting and trying to
act in a democratic way
to make their own power,
to expand their own control
over their lives and
their society, that
threatens the transnational
capitalist class.
It threatens those elites.
And when there's leaders of
countries that do that like
Qaddafi-- he was proposing
that all the oil be--
>>NOORY: And Saddam, right?
>>PHILLIPS: Yeah, he
was proposing that oil
be sold in gold, from Africa.
>>NOORY: That was
his big mistake.
>>PHILLIPS: Well, they
wanted to get rid of him.
>>NOORY: Yeah, that
was his mistake.
>>PHILLIPS: Saddam
Hussein was selling oil
in euros and not dollars.
So when the heads
of state do that,
then that's time
for regime change.
>>NOORY: The word to leaders--
don't dump your dollars
for oil.
Keep that monetary
system the same, right?
>>PHILLIPS: Keep the
capital system the same,
and don't interfere with
the central banks, certainly
the central banks in
Europe and America.
>>NOORY: It's amazing that they
would take out leaders merely
because of things like that.
>>PHILLIPS: Well, there
will be policy formations.
So if you go to the
World Economic Forum,
they're doing reports from
there that this is a concern.
Land prices in Africa are
going up too fast, or whatever.
Then governments will take
a look at these policy
recommendations from
these global elites,
and then act on them.
So the US has set up Africom.
So we have troops in 134
nations now, around the world--
>>NOORY: We're all
over the place.
>>PHILLIPS: --a
thousand military bases.
And that's tied into NATO.
So NATO's part of that.
You have this
surplus of capital,
and it's concentrated
in just less than 1%
of the world population.
They manage these
hundreds of trillions
of dollars' worth of wealth.
They're looking for
places to invest
it and/or to spend it so
that they get a return
and get even more wealth.
So war is one way
that that happens.
So if the military
empire, US-NATO empire,
starts a war somewhere, they
buy the stuff for the war.
So that simulates a lot of
profits for many corporations.
They destroy a bunch of stuff.
Then you have to go back in,
and fix it, and built it.
>>NOORY: They love doing this.
That's how they
make their money.
>>PHILLIPS: That's
permanent war.
That's tied into concentration
of global capital.
And they're worried about it.
I mean, they worry about
democracy movements
emerging that will undermine
and destroy their wealth.
And they are literally
afraid of that.
And they work entirely towards
protecting that wealth.
And that's what the
military empire's
about, and private
mercenaries, and public media.
It's all about
protecting world capital.
>>NOORY: If you said this,
Peter, to the average person,
that this was really going
on, what would they say?
Would they believe it?
Would they understand it?
>>PHILLIPS: Well,
there's zero coverage.
I mean, people know about
the Trilateral Commission,
or they know about
Eisenhower's--
>>NOORY: The Bilderbergs, yeah.
>>PHILLIPS: --warning of the
military-industrial empire.
They know that there's
elites in this country.
But they often don't
understand, nor has there
been a lot of work
on, transnational,
globalized capital.
And for the last 20
years, sociologists
have been researching the
transnational capitalist class.
And there's some really
good work in that area.
David Rothkopf did a book
called "The Superclass."
He used to work for Kissinger.
So he would go to the
Bilderberger Group,
and he would see this kind
of interaction going on.
And so we have a
number of good books.
William Robinson is probably
one of the best right now.
He's a professor at UC Santa
Barbara who does books.
His latest is
called "Capitalism--
The Crisis of Humanity."
And he was talking
about how humanity--
the poverty is happening.
But to control those masses,
there's increased police state.
I mean, he really talks about
creeping fascism in the world.
>>NOORY: They actually
will kill people
if things get out
of hand, won't they?
>>PHILLIPS: Oh, everywhere.
>>NOORY: Even here?
>>PHILLIPS: There are more
private mercenaries in Honduras
than there is Honduras
government people.
And they had their coup
back there six years ago,
and took over the democratically
elected government.
And then now, there's
free-flowing neoliberal
capitalism going on.
People resist, they get killed.
>>NOORY: What about Venezuela?
Now that Chavez has died,
the place is a mess.
>>PHILLIPS: Well, our media
keeps telling us it's a mass.
The price of oil collapsed,
so that was deliberate.
And Maduro still has the
support of the people.
He would be reelected
today, probably, 2 to 1,
if they had an election.
>>NOORY: Peter, is
this a game for them?
What do they really want?
It's not just a
return of 7% to 10%.
It's control, isn't it?
>>PHILLIPS: It's power.
It's power at the
highest levels.
And you have, in each
state, security forces,
or what Peter Dale Scott
calls the deep state, people
who act behind the scenes
that make things happen.
So October surprises,
assassinations,
wealth diminishing
or problems arising,
investigations on
people you don't like,
exposures, entrapments
happen all the time.
So they're manipulating.
These people in deep state
politics, behind the scenes,
are in service to capital.
They know who their bosses are.
It's not like the bosses
are telling them directly,
you go assassinate somebody.
They know what to do.
And as long as they
get the job done,
then they're allowed to continue
to exist to do what they do.
>>NOORY: And who
do they report to?
>>PHILLIPS: Well, every
government agency,
whether it's the
CIA, or the FBI,
or NSA, or military
intelligence,
has chains of command.
But inside those
organizations, there
are units of activity
that are semi-independent.
>>NOORY: They're
rogue, aren't they?
>>PHILLIPS: Well, "rogue"
is an interesting word.
If they get caught, then
they say they're rogue.
But they are institutionalized
inside of these organizations.
And there's money
that can be used.
Some of it's drug money.
And so there's
billions of dollars
available for these
deep state actors
to engage in global
power manipulation.
>>NOORY: I had heard that
when the Taliban was in charge
of Afghanistan, they put the lid
on the poppy seed production,
right?
>>PHILLIPS: There was no
poppy seed production,
except in the north,
which they didn't control.
>>NOORY: And then, once we
took over, it increased.
>>PHILLIPS: Full-blown poppy
production again, right.
>>NOORY: Unbelievable.
>>PHILLIPS: 800 tons of--
>>NOORY: And it's all
illegal drug money.
What do they do with the money?
>>PHILLIPS: It goes
in the central banks.
In 2008, with the crisis we
had, the collapse of the housing
market, it was the
drug money that kind of
kept the banks afloat.
>>NOORY: Amazing.
The public doesn't get it.
>>PHILLIPS: Half
a billion-- no, I
mean half a trillion-- dollars
in drug money annually.
And so it's like-- the DEA is
trying to control drugs, right?
That's their job.
That's their task force.
But in Honduras, or
Mexico, or whatever,
it's sort of like
controlling-- it's more
like regulating the drug flow.
There are certain
people, certain cartels,
certain government officials
that are in the drug business
and always have been.
And they're not to be bothered.
You go after the small fry.
You go after ones that are
challenging the most powerful.
>>NOORY: Peter, I want to take
a look at a clip on the Bohemian
Grove.
>>PHILLIPS: OK.
>>NOORY: And then we'll
come back and talk about it.
Take a look at this first.
>>Located within the redwoods
of Sonoma County, California,
Bohemian Grove is the
stuff of conspiracy legend.
The Grove is owned by
the all-male Bohemian
Club, which was founded
in San Francisco in 1872.
Today it is one of the most
exclusive clubs in the United
States.
The waiting list for
membership is decades long,
and the membership
roster includes
numerous influential
men, US presidents,
foreign dignitaries,
writers like Mark Twain,
and businessmen like Henry Ford.
Each year, the members
gather with their guests
for a 16-day-long
closed door celebration.
Rumors about this
meeting run wild,
from allegations of
hedonistic partying
to outright human sacrifice
and worship of a gigantic owl
statute.
For years, members
of the public have
tried to infiltrate
this gathering
and learn what's
actually going on.
Are the rumors true?
Could the leaders
of the United States
really meet in secret
once a year for rituals
and obscure celebrations?
It seems far fetched, but
here's where it gets crazy.
It's true-- or at least some of
it, including the owl statute.
In 1989, journalist
Phillip Weiss
managed to sneak into the Grove.
In his article for
"Spy" magazine,
Weiss describes the situation.
CEOs, celebrities, and
government officials
were partying with
elaborate performances,
round-the-clock drinks,
songs, and speeches.
The opening ceremony, called
the cremation of care,
is one of the
strangest performances.
In this ceremony, people
dressed as priests
bear the crypt of a
symbolic Mr. Dull Care
to the edge of the Grove's lake.
More characters emerge at the
base of a 40-foot-tall statue
of an owl.
These characters sing
a ceremonial song,
and more spectacles occur.
Each year, the owl of
Bohemia instructs the members
to burn the crypt
of Mr. Dull Care
with the eternal
flame of fellowship.
>>NOORY: Peter, our buddy Alex
Jones infiltrated the Bohemian
Grove many years ago.
That's a strange,
strange place, isn't it?
>>PHILLIPS: I was there.
>>NOORY: Did you infiltrate,
or invited guest?
>>PHILLIPS: I was
an invited guest.
I did my dissertation
on the Bohemian Grove.
And a good part of the
clip, it kind of exaggerates
what they're about.
I mean, it's a big men's party.
>>NOORY: It is, for sure.
>>PHILLIPS: There's some
very powerful people there.
>>NOORY: Is it a club?
>>PHILLIPS: Yeah, it's
a private men's club.
It's for men only.
They don't have
women membership.
They have a club in San
Francisco, a clubhouse.
>>NOORY: Do you still go?
>>PHILLIPS: No, no,
I wasn't a member.
I just wrote my
dissertation on them.
I was invited as a guest.
So I you get to go to Grove.
I saw the cremation
of care ceremony.
I interviewed, literally,
hundreds of bohemians.
They are powerful people.
One out of five is
somebody very powerful
in government or a
major corporation.
They interact and play together.
They drink a lot.
They entertain each other.
The cremation of care
ceremony is a little bizarre,
because they are
dressed up in robes,
and they do burn the
skeleton of care.
>>NOORY: Like "Eyes Wide Shut?"
That kind of look?
>>PHILLIPS: Well--
>>NOORY: Ohh.
>>PHILLIPS: That movie's a
little far-fetched as well.
But yeah, it leads to
having a good time.
And I was there during
care, and there's
guys out in the
audience that are
kind of chuckling and stuff.
But some take it very seriously.
But part of it, the seriousness
is that they're coming back
to the same place every year.
And they can talk
with the same people.
And they have little cabins
they can stay in, and camps.
There's 120 different camps,
and every camp has a bar.
And they have lunch there.
And then there's a big dining
area where they all go.
But there's lots of
entertainment, lots of poetry,
a lot of exchanges, and
then a lot of conversations
about politics, and
business, and that.
They're not supposed
to do business there.
They don't per se,
but I certainly
heard plenty of men talking
about major business issues.
>>NOORY: Do they do
weird things there?
We've heard all kinds of
bizarre stuff come out of there.
>>PHILLIPS: Well, some of
that has come from Alex Jones.
And he could have gone in one
time with my lawyer friend,
but chose to sneak in instead.
But my dissertation is online.
People read it all the time.
It pretty much lays out
the work in that area.
Bill Domhoff did a book on the
Bohemian Grove before that.
He was on my
dissertation committee.
And so I think we
were pretty clear
that it is a relative
advantage-- that
was my subtitle-- to being
in a club like that in terms
of your own personal gains and
access to the people in power.
But there's private men's clubs
like that all over the world.
Certainly, the British
Empire had them everyone.
And that's what the ones in
the US are modeled after.
So yeah, it's a place where
powerful people gather and do.
But they're not making
policy decisions.
They don't--
>>NOORY: Not there.
>>PHILLIPS: --issue
policy reports.
But the people there may belong
to the Trilateral Commission,
or they may belong to the
Council on Foreign Relations.
In fact, a lot of them do.
And the Council, CFR, is
making reports annually
that are team-based, scholarly
reports on policy direction.
So when Obama went to Cuba,
it wasn't on his own volition.
CFR, five years ago, said, it's
time to break down the barriers
with Cuba.
>>NOORY: We should have
done that years ago.
>>PHILLIPS: Oh, of
course we should have.
>>NOORY: I mean, the fact that
you can't get a Cuban cigar
here legally is crazy, right?
And that's another story too.
I mean, the entire Fidel
Castro overthrowing Batista,
losing a relationship with
us, it goes way, way back.
And of course, as
you all know, they
wanted to kill Castro for years.
The Kennedy
administration tries.
Eisenhower tried.
This guy was Teflon.
>>PHILLIPS: And they supported
terrorist attacks on Cuba.
So those are all stories at
Project Censored, our research
group that I managed for
16 years, at Sonoma State,
would cover.
And so Project Censored has
been around for 40 years now.
We put out an annual
book called "Censored,"
and that's where I
publish my research
work on the transnational
capitalist class.
>>NOORY: What are these people--
the elitists, what are they
really worried about?
Because there's some
underlining tone of concern.
What is it?
>>PHILLIPS: Well,
they're certainly
worried about-- think about
it like you're the plantation
owner, and you live in
the big, white house,
and you're surrounded by slaves.
You're kind of afraid,
and you're always worried.
>>NOORY: And you're afraid,
one day, you'll wake up,
and the slaves will try
to break your house down.
>>PHILLIPS: Exactly.
>>NOORY: But you created that.
>>PHILLIPS: We're
talking, it's globally.
>>NOORY: But you
created the slaves.
You hired them.
You kidnapped them.
You did whatever you had to.
>>PHILLIPS: And you
supported create capitalism
at the global level.
And wealth gets concentrated,
and then it's expanded,
and it's put into derivatives.
It's no longer wealth invested
in a factory to make things.
It's wealth investing
in wealth to see
if it can make money in return.
>>NOORY: Why do they need more?
>>PHILLIPS:
Capitalism needs more.
If it stops, then
it just stagnates.
Nothing happens.
And we'll see massive
economic collapse.
>>NOORY: Why can't
they take care
of these billions of people
who are living on $3 a day
that you've said?
>>PHILLIPS: Well, that's
a pretty good question.
Why can't that?
>>NOORY: They could,
couldn't they?
>>PHILLIPS: Absolutely.
We could restructure the world.
Everybody could be fed.
Everybody could have a
place to eat and live.
Everybody could be engaged
in gainful, good activities.
And wealth could,
in fact, be shared
in a much more democratic way.
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
>>PHILLIPS: That's
called democracy.
It's called grassroots power.
It's called people
making decisions
at the lowest possible level.
>>NOORY: When I look at a
person sleeping on a bus bench
because he or she has no place
to live or go, in this country,
with the kind of wealth we have,
Peter, it's appalling to me.
>>PHILLIPS: It's a sin.
You know, I'm a Catholic kid,
and I think about it that way.
It's sinful.
>>NOORY: Yes.
>>PHILLIPS: And I mean,
that's just morally wrong.
And as a sociologist, we
can study how this happens.
People make bad decisions,
and they end up in bad ways.
But it's structural.
There's not enough jobs for
everybody in this country
or anywhere in the world.
And the pay-- they give
them a salary to live on.
So how are people going to live?
>>NOORY: Build them facilities
that they can sleep in.
>>PHILLIPS: Absolutely.
>>NOORY: Doesn't have
to be the Taj Mahal,
but create something.
But where are
presidential candidates
talking about things like that,
that really affect people?
>>PHILLIPS: Presidential
candidates all
work for the transnational
capitalist class,
or they are respectful to that.
So when Hilary says that she
goes to the Council on Foreign
Relations to get advice on the
State Department, she means it,
she does.
CFR is the adviser to
the State Department.
And because these organizations
and capital wealth
is able to communicate, through
these various organizations,
what their needs are, what
their policy should be,
then, states will act on that.
>>NOORY: So Peter, you've
mentioned the Trilateral
Commission.
I want to look at a video first,
and we can talk a little bit
about who they are.
Here we go.
>>According to their website,
the Trilateral Commission
was founded in 1973, bringing
private sector leaders together
to discuss global issues.
This organization filled a
crucial gap in communication
between Europe, North
America, and Asia.
Originally, the founders
envisioned a need
for closer cooperation in an era
of increasing interdependence
as the US lost some
of its old influence.
Nowadays, the common term for
this sort of interdependence
is "globalization."
The group has three chairman
positions, one for each region.
The Trilateral Commission
is a small group,
with around 390 members.
So why do conspiracy
theorists think the group
wants to take over the world?
Here's where it gets crazy.
According to conspiracy
theorists like Alex Jones,
the Trilateral
Commission is attempting
to create a
one-world government.
Other groups such
as the Bilderbergers
have also been accused of
pursuing similar goals.
Jones isn't the only
one who believes this.
Several US politicians,
including Barry Goldwater,
also believe the Trilateral
Commission is an attempt
to consolidate
power and influence
outside of the traditional
political structure,
ultimately, with the goal
of overpowering governments.
>>NOORY: So what about that
push for a one-world government?
Is that part of
their agenda, Peter?
>>PHILLIPS: No, it's not.
Their agenda is primarily to
protect capitalism worldwide.
Militarily, that
happens, but they're not
pushing for a UN, United
Nations one-world government.
They don't need to.
Governments cooperate
with them now.
If they don't
cooperate, then they'll
get rid of the leaders
that are there.
And where there's resistance,
like in Venezuela, or in Cuba,
or certainly in China, or
North Korea, and other places,
they're doing everything they
can to undermine those states.
But the rest of the
states in the world,
pretty much, the elites
in those countries
go along with the agenda.
So they don't need
to replace them.
So it's sort of
like nation-states
become population containment
zones for people in the world.
And then they're
utilized as labor forces
at the lowest possible
salary levels.
So that's where
our companies will
go around and make your
boxing shorts at the cheapest
place they can.
>>NOORY: And they love
doing that, don't they?
>>PHILLIPS: And they
love doing that.
And it helps them expand, but
it undermines working people
around the world.
>>NOORY: Peter, what was it
that was the catalyst for this?
I mean, there was a time that
we here, in the United States,
produced most of the
steel on the planet.
There was a time that we have
factories up and running,
flourishing.
Most of them are gone now.
Now we get our steel from
China, and we get our goods out
of Mexico and China.
What happened?
How did this happen?
It just seems like it
collapsed overnight.
>>PHILLIPS: Well,
part of it was where
the new steel plants the
Japanese and the Chinese built
were more efficient
than ones we had.
Ours were old.
But the world is globalized now.
So capital is everywhere in the
world, including even China.
Their billionaires invest
in our capitalist system.
They put their
money in our banks.
So it's transnational.
And it's managed by these
few thousand people that are
in every country in the world.
And so wherever steel
gets made or whatever,
yeah, from a state perspective,
a working perspective,
we still think, oh,
in the United State,
we have to have this, this, and
this, and this, and all that.
Those companies
don't care anymore,
and capital doesn't care.
>>NOORY: Those days
are gone, aren't they?
>>PHILLIPS: They're
gone in terms of us,
the working people.
And democracy or elections
don't change that.
We have an election
to get a president in,
and it doesn't matter.
They have to go along
with that agenda.
And if they challenge that
agenda or you challenge
the deep state in
the US, you're going
to end up like John Kennedy,
and Robert Kennedy, and Martin
Luther King.
>>NOORY: And out they go,
in one way or another.
>>PHILLIPS: Yeah.
>>NOORY: One way or another.
Are these people insane?
I mean, they've created
incredible wealth
for themselves.
They have all the
money they need.
They have homes, places.
They travel.
They have fun.
>>PHILLIPS: Private jets.
>>NOORY: Private jets.
I mean, why don't they stop?
Enough is enough.
Enjoy your life.
We're not here that long.
>>PHILLIPS: "Insane"
is a harsh word.
>>NOORY: Yes.
>>PHILLIPS: But--
>>NOORY: There's something
wrong with these people.
>>PHILLIPS: --there's no
empathy for other human beings,
a separation from-- kind of
a pathological separation--
as a human.
You're not a human
being, really.
There's a sickness.
>>NOORY: There is a sickness.
>>PHILLIPS: Yes.
>>NOORY: There's no
doubt about that.
And they're all in that
sickness, as a group.
>>PHILLIPS: They're caught
up in that sickness.
And they think, well, I
can't do anything about it.
I can't change it.
And they will have to
change it, or we're
going to collapse economically
and/or environmentally
within our younger
generation's lifetime.
>>NOORY: And the planet is
already busting at the seams.
You can feel it.
And I think social
network has contributed
to that, where the average
person now has a voice where
they never did before.
>>PHILLIPS: Well,
they can, but they're
countered by corporate
media in a very big way.
I mean, we're talking about six
major corporations now, almost,
in the world, but
certainly in the US,
that are our corporate world.
And they're part
of the power elite.
They're part of the
transnational class.
A major part of their
content is put together
by public relations and
propaganda firms, like 80%.
And these big firms, WPP,
Omnicom, and Interpublic Group,
they employ a couple
hundred thousand people.
They do $35 trillion
worth of wealth.
They're the ones that are
putting advertisements out.
But they also work for
the International Monetary
Fund, the World Bank.
They do the ads for the Navy,
and the Marines, and everyone
else.
If you've seen that ad,
it's from-- it was entitled
"America's Navy, The Shield."
And it came out first
during the Army-Navy game.
>>NOORY: And it was slick.
>>PHILLIPS: Very slick.
And it's this family in
the middle of the street,
and a cute little girl.
And then there's surrounded
by all the different people
in the Navy, and the
Marines, and women.
>>NOORY: And you
feel safe and secure.
>>PHILLIPS: Feel
safe and secure.
It keeps running.
That's a propaganda film.
There's nothing else about it.
It's that the national
security state is protecting us
from them, the bad people.
>>NOORY: Well, they probably
got the idea from Goebbels
in Nazi Germany,
because that's all
they did was come up
with propaganda films.
>>PHILLIPS: They had
plenty of it then,
but they're more subtle now.
And so you have these massive
public relations and propaganda
film that are interwoven
with government.
And they're the ones doing all
the advertising for product
management and stuff like that.
Our new study
coming out this year
is going to-- we looked
at all their clients.
I mean, it's just amazing.
Any supermarket you walk
into, everything there
is managed by one of those three
firms in terms of their PR.
>>NOORY: And how to do
it, placement, everything.
>>PHILLIPS: Everything.
It's just huge.
>>NOORY: They know human
psychology, don't they?
>>PHILLIPS: Yeah, very much so.
And so they're in service to the
transnational capitalist class,
as are mercenary companies.
The second largest employer in
the world is WG4-- sorry, G4S.
They employ 600,000 people.
They're a securities firm.
They're a mercenary company.
They're based in Great Britain.
But they manage some
of our prisons here.
They do training of police.
>>NOORY: Sure.
Nice contracts, huh?
>>PHILLIPS: They're
a huge version
of-- well, a lot of
people know Blackwater,
which is now Constellis.
Triple Canopy, they
merged after the Iraq War.
So there's a lot of
private mercenary companies
all over the world.
In some cases, they are
the police for states,
like Honduras.
>>NOORY: So if they want
you to disrupt the nation,
they hire them.
>>PHILLIPS: They hire them
to protect themselves.
So it's like, if you're
incredibly wealthy,
you can hire people
to protect you.
You can create your
own green zone,
and literally separate yourself
from the rest of the world.
>>NOORY: Dwight Eisenhower, when
he left office back in 1961,
of course, when he
turned the gauntlet over
to John F. Kennedy, warned us
about the military-industrial
complex.
>>DWIGHT EISENHOWER:
We have been
compelled to create
a permanent armaments
industry of vast proportions.
Added to this, 3 and 1/2
million men and women
are directly engaged in
the defense establishment.
We annually spend,
on military security
alone, more than the net
income of all United States
corporations.
Now, this conjunction of an
immense military establishment
and a large arms industry is
new in the American experience.
The total influence, economic,
political, even spiritual,
is felt in every city, every
state house, every office
of the federal government.
We recognize the imperative
need for this development,
yet we must not
fail to comprehend
its grave implications.
Our toil, resources, and
livelihood are all involved.
So in the very structure
of our society.
In the councils
of government, we
must guard against
the acquisition
of unwarranted influence,
whether sought or unsought,
by the military-industrial
complex.
The potential for the disastrous
rise of misplaced power
exists and will persist.
We must never let the
weight of this combination
endanger our liberties
or democratic processes.
>>NOORY: Isn't that
incredible coming
from a person who was a
general during World War II?
>>PHILLIPS: It was an
amazing statement, certainly,
at the time, and of course,
has manifested itself
as being true or
even beyond that now.
And I don't think we
took it seriously enough.
>>NOORY: No.
>>PHILLIPS: The next president
did, and paid with it
for his life.
>>NOORY: Yeah, no
question about that.
At this point today, if you
listen to Eisenhower's words
and apply it to what's
going on now, he was right.
He was right on, wasn't he?
>>PHILLIPS: Well, he was right--
certainly, yeah, under Truman,
the National Security
Act was passed
that created the CIA,
which is kind of an OSS.
The Dulles brothers
were involved.
They were pretty much running
State and the CIA together.
So they were there
the deep state.
They were the ones pushing it.
So it's no accident that
Dulles ran the commission
after Kennedy was assassination,
the investigation, so to speak.
So they were very powerful
people at that time.
And they worked directly
for major corporations
of the world, and
brought about coups
in Guatemala and other
places, certainly, in Iran.
>>NOORY: Did Kennedy have
to go according to them?
>>PHILLIPS: Definitely,
I think he did.
Because he was
challenging the CIA.
He wasn't going to go
along with a global war
process of expanding military.
And he was seriously
thinking about getting out
of and diminishing our
involvement in Vietnam.
So that was a strong counter.
But he particularly wanted
to dismantle the CIA.
He thought that they were a
threat to American freedoms.
>>NOORY: He was right.
>>PHILLIPS: He was very right.
>>NOORY: And he paid for it.
>>PHILLIPS: He paid for it.
>>NOORY: And his
brother paid for it.
>>PHILLIPS: His brother paid
for it, yes, absolutely.
David Talbot's work on
that, "The Brothers,"
I have my students read
that in my classes,
and it's an amazing work.
>>NOORY: Yeah, David's been a
guest on the "Coast to Coast"
radio show.
He's a great person.
>>PHILLIPS: He's a good scholar.
>>NOORY: So where do
we go from here, Peter?
What happens next?
>>PHILLIPS: Well,
it's inevitable
that democracy movements
are going to continue
to arise all over the world.
It's inevitable
that capital will
become so concentrated
that they're not
going to have some place.
So we're going to see
continuing economic crises.
So they're speculating.
There's bubbles
all over the place
in terms of various commodities,
or land, or water, or whatever.
Those are not sustainable.
So there's going to be
continuing economic unrest
in a variety of ways.
It's going to be harder and
harder for, like, young people
today to get jobs that will get
them out of their college debt,
and have them be able to buy
a home, and have a family.
It's just not going to happen.
And these are people
that have expectations
of being able to have a
working middle class life.
And when your frustrations
are blocked like that,
you're far more
likely to resist.
And our research
on revolutions show
that you're far more likely to
resist than the poorest people
just uprising, unless
they're starving.
There are food riots.
But the resistance and
organized resistance
usually comes from
frustrated working class
numbers of people.
>>NOORY: Will we
get to that point,
that frustrated working class?
>>PHILLIPS: I think
it's inevitable.
We're already
seeing it manifested
in terms of the extremes
that are being voted for
or pushing in this election.
Both Democrat and Republican
Party, the traditions
are hard to have
been maintained.
Trump is outside of those
traditions, as was Bernie.
>>NOORY: So is there
hope for people?
>>PHILLIPS: Oh, I think so.
I really believe in
democratic movements.
And the people should need
to speak out and address it.
And I think scholars have
to do this kind of work
and really allow people to
understand what's happening.
And we have to look
at it as global.
It's not just here in
the US, it's national.
And then we have to be
very suspicious of things
like, oh, we have to
have a war on terror.
The war on terror
is a fraud, and it
has been from the beginning.
And the war on drugs is a fraud.
Capital is invested in both of
those and benefits from them.
>>NOORY: They want terror.
They have to have terror.
>>PHILLIPS: It helps maintain
the expanded military empire--
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
>>PHILLIPS: --and the
spending in that area,
so companies make
huge amounts of money.
And the privatization
of war-- so
we're seeing not
only privatization
inside the military,
but privatization
of mercenary forces that
can conduct war themselves.
>>NOORY: I've always
suspected that ISIS
was financed by the complex.
>>PHILLIPS: It was.
And the Saudis were
involved in that.
And they opened up their
prisoners are said,
you're going to
go fight in Syria,
or we're going to execute you.
>>NOORY: That's why they don't
have any problems in Saudi
Arabia, right?
They pay them not
to do anything here.
>>PHILLIPS: And they
were funneling money
into Afghanistan, as was
the CIA and Pakistan ISI.
>>NOORY: Why, Peter, some of
these areas in the Middle East,
like Bahrain,
Kuwait, the Emirates,
Saudi Arabia go
untouched with terrorism.
Because these people
are being bought off
to stay away from those
countries, aren't they?
>>PHILLIPS: And they're
military states.
I mean, you mess around
too much, you're gone.
And they're allies of
the United States empire.
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
>>PHILLIPS: And it's
about resources.
It's about oil.
It's about global resources
in that, and control of that.
But it's also about
having zero resistance
to the free flow of capital
anywhere in the world.
I mean, that's what
neoliberalism means.
That's what the TPP's about.
That's what NAFTA was about,
is free flow of capital.
It's restrictions on people, but
free flow of capital worldwide.
But when you have these wars,
and millions of people are
at unrest-- or in Iraq, as
we did, we created, like,
5 million refugees--
>>NOORY: Yes, instantly.
>>PHILLIPS: --of various
source, we killed a million
and a half people.
>>NOORY: Very sad.
Very sad.
Do you feel like,
knowing what you know,
you want to just stick
your head in the sand?
Is this something that you would
do just to have this go away
and pretend it doesn't exist?
Or do you continue
to fight and let
the word-- get the word out?
>>PHILLIPS: Well, I love
to kick liberal ostriches.
I like to kick
them and have them
pull their heads
out of the sand,
because that's
what we have to do.
And there's no hiding from this.
It's affecting our weather,
our way of life, our incomes.
It threatens
long-term investments.
I'm a college professor.
I'll have a retirement
through CalPERS,
but CalPERS is
invested in the market.
So it impacts all of our lives.
And the only way to
really address this
is to democratic-- full
transparency, no censorship,
news from the bottom up, and
truth telling as a way of life.
We have a truth
emergency in the world.
>>NOORY: Will we always live
in fear, or can we stop this?
>>PHILLIPS: I think
we can stop it.
The power elites are
the one living in fear.
>>NOORY: You think so?
>>PHILLIPS: They're
communicating fear to us.
They're trying to make us
afraid of different things.
>>NOORY: Have they
created that fear?
>>PHILLIPS: Yeah,
they really do.
It's like, we grew up in a time
when the nuclear bombs could
hit us at any time, right?
And it was fearful.
What would I do
if the bombs came?
Well, we're actually closer
to using nuclear weapons today
than we were in the Cold War.
Obama put a trillion dollars
into upgrading the nukes
and created these
little mini-nukes
so you can take out three
blocks instead of entire cities.
>>NOORY: Instead of this
whole whole city, yeah.
>>PHILLIPS: Yeah.
And that makes them more viable
to be used, and that's sick.
That's really--
>>NOORY: So what would you say
to a family raising children
right now about their future?
>>PHILLIPS: Become involved.
Stand on the principles
that you believe in,
your own moral values, your
own belief in democracy.
People believe in democracy.
They believe we have
one, which we don't.
But they don't
understand how elites,
and how the transnational
class, and global money
controls their lives in
so many different ways
and how concentrated it is.
>>NOORY: What can they
do, the individual?
Anything?
>>PHILLIPS: Build
your own security.
Mobilize with neighbors in
terms of support and economics.
Yeah, it's got to be bottom up.
>>NOORY: And don't give up.
>>PHILLIPS: And don't give up.
>>NOORY: Peter, thanks for
being on "Beyond Belief."
Appreciate it.
>>PHILLIPS: I'm
happy to be here.
>>NOORY: You heard
it, don't give up.
We can't say much more than
that, because it's out there.
The elitists are out there doing
what they're doing to control,
and you need to be
able to fight back.
But do it in the smart way.
I'm George Noory.
Thanks for watching
"Beyond Belief."
[THEME MUSIC]